now a look at US intelligence activities
in Central Europe after the Second World
War
last month the Central Intelligence
Agency sponsored this form several
former agents describe post-war
intelligence and their roles within it
first is James Crutchfield he has an
honor
ROTC graduate of the University of North
Dakota in 1939
James Crutchfield took a regular army
commission went on active duty and
served throughout the Second World War
as an armor officer great distinction in
campaigns in North Africa Italy France
and Germany I think he once told me that
in all of that service he never actually
heard of OSS after the war the army sent
him he can deny that after the war the
army sent him for a years graduate study
at Columbia University but in the spring
of 1946 he returned to Europe as chief
of the counterintelligence for the
American occupation army in Germany he
found the intelligence community in
Germany at that time close to a disaster
he was I had an opportunity to do
something quite different which turned
out quite well in 1947 1948 he went to
Austria set up a centralized US
intelligence effort there in 1948 he
joined CIA who sent the Germany to
develop the first Soviet operations base
he was almost immediately diverted to
look at the Army's what was called then
the operation rusty the Gailen
organization for almost eight years he
was a CIA officer with the responsible
for the gala an organization and a topic
which he'll tell us more about shortly
after returning to Washington he served
two years as chief of the Directorate of
plans East European division later was
the first national intelligence officer
for energy had a distinguished career
since retiring he has been and is about
to complete a book on his Germany's
transition from enemy to a line based
largely on his personal experiences and
so without any further ado let me begin
with the first speaker and ask mr.
pritchfield
ken thank you very much I thank you for
your very precise Mac your description
of how I got into the intelligence
business it's also a tremendous pleasure
to be here with these gentlemen aligned
on my right who represent most of my
life one way or another in 10 minutes I
can only give you some very pointed
highlights when in 1944 President
Roosevelt made a decision to assign to
the Secretary of War and the Joint
Chiefs of Staff the responsibility for
the occupied areas after the war he
initially did this for a period of six
months as we all know this went on much
longer than that and in practical terms
in Germany it was as Kent has stated a
ten-year experience I do regard the
whole experience and American soldiers
in Germany after the war as very much of
a learning period the intelligence
community was oddly led by the command
echelons of the occupation they knew
very little about intelligence and paid
very little attention to it but the
command structure was extremely faulty
and I'll touch on that in a moment and
contributed to a decade in which we had
a essentially uncoordinated divided
intelligence community there were other
factors however when I joined CIA I
immediately noticed that there was a
deep cultural influence in CIA that was
quite different from that which I had
experienced as a very conventional
Regular Army officer bill Quinn in his
book which has been mentioned gives an
excellent analysis of his impression of
that when he was assigned to SSU at the
end of the war there was virtually no
American intelligence effort that was
focused on
when bill Quinn formed SSU he this was
one of the first things that he observed
so he reached out overseas someplace and
got hairy was it C to come back to
Washington and assigned him the task of
organizing the initial SSU Soviet effort
it was that picture that I was at that
time that I entered the picture and
having met dick Elms and a few others in
Europe I came back and made an enormous
decision to leave the Regular Army
enjoying the Central Intelligence Agency
and take on the task of organizing
however it is first operational base
overseas which perchance was to be in
Munich but as you heard I no sooner got
there spent three or four months doing
this and when very casually I was asked
to in addition to my other duties on the
north side of Munich would I go out the
south side of Munich and take a look at
an organization in the village of pork
that was called operation recipe about
which I knew a good deal having served
in in Germany and in Austria and having
experienced rusty agents going by in the
field without knowing anything about
where they came from or what they were
supposed to be doing
general Seibert who was the first g2 at
the end of the war was assigned to use
that the United States forces European
theater which was created in the summer
of 1945 when shafe was eliminated and
General Eisenhower became the theater
commander and as the g2 of 12th Army
Group general Seibert immediately became
his g2 and he very effectively exploited
the power and the prestige of General
Eisenhower to quickly bring under his
own control all of the intelligence
activities of any consequence that were
going on in Germany at the time I would
exclude SSU from that because it was
doing so little that it did not really
figure very significantly in those early
days I can tell you that as chief of the
counterintelligence branch at the
occupation or in the garden in
Heidelberg I found a fella named Gordon
Stewart and another fellow named Crosby
Lewis and they used to come by my office
occasionally
but not very often and occasionally had
problems but I did not perceive that
they were at that time really a
significant factor the two big
organizations in Germany that were
simply overwhelming the what we came to
call the intelligence jungle because
that's what Germany was in the first two
and a half years after the war the two
organizations were the what became to
give an organization that was being run
out of over ercel by general cyber and
about which he was extremely protective
and extremely secretive he told the Army
of Occupation which was only an hour
down the autobahn from Frankfurt
absolutely nothing about this operation
he also insisted on total control of the
only major counterintelligence core unit
in Germany at that time the 970 of CIC
and refused to share either it's the
direction of it or its product with the
commanding general of the occupation
army when I got to park I took a good
look in a very superficial way because
it was it was a casual exercise I assure
you and I found that the there was
immediately apparent that there were two
things that the Gillan organization did
pretty well there
evaluation their research and analysis
with regard to Sylvia armed forces was
very impressive and it should have done
because they were the only organization
in the world that had been operating
directly against the Soviet Union Soviet
armed forces without interruption since
the beginning of the attack of Soviet
Union in 1941 so we were getting a very
good bargain there because we did not
have in the United States intelligence
community any real competence to deal
with the Soviet armed forces and the
military industrial complex the Soviet
Union which was out there waiting for us
to deal with so we got a good bargain
there I found that all of the analysts
and
all of the consumers of the intelligence
Magellan organization were positive
friendly and helpful I found all of the
operators in German in Germany including
CIC military intelligence and most of
the operating bases of CIA were just as
hostile and antagonistic as they could
be and so when I set it into park in
1949 I sort of decided it was time to
circle the wagons and wait for the
attacks they all came in the course of
the next five years I would like to give
you just a little vignette 1949 you
remember was sino-soviet agreement first
Soviet bomb was tested NATO was found
the German Federal Republic was created
Adenauer became Chancellor General clay
went home John McCloy came over and
became high commissioner and last but
not least the I am the first of July
took over the Galen organization I found
that we had gotten more than we had
bargained for I knew that the Galen
organization was in fact a well-rounded
German intelligence service about which
we could not quickly make a qualitative
judgment but it was quite clear to us
that it had certain confidence and
fields in which the United States was
interested but I also found we had
something else in Pollock that nobody
had told me about after I'd been there a
short time a very quiet little gentleman
who I'd met as dr. Horne head of their
research and analysis staff invited me
to come by and have a glass of wine with
him one night and what he had to say was
that he who was Adolf poisoner who had
been head of the operation division of
the German General Staff in the whole
war he quietly explained to me a very
low-key way that he and Jenny Han
Speidel well-known German general and
general Hermann furch would command
first German army at the end of the war
had been closely studying the situation
balance of power in Europe and the
bottom line was that they were preparing
a position to present to a future German
government on how Germany might be
integrated in a Western alliance headed
by the United States
that came and something it was surprised
to me so we got the next year
and fortunately we went up in January
and we good John J McCloy an exhaustive
briefing on this he sent his director of
intelligence Ben shoot down we gave him
the full story we went through that and
then came the Korean War and everything
changed immediately all my problems of
getting enough money out of debt columns
to to pay for the groceries and Porlock
ended because the the value of the doin
organizations in its product very
quickly was enhanced by the Korean War
then four days after the Korean War
started Adenauer reached out to his
state secretary a man named dr. Hans
Gupta and got in touch with Galen
we took no initial initiative we played
no role in that and then two weeks later
he reached out and got in touch with
Adolf poisoner and that began the
relationship with the German Federal
Republic with the Gailen organization
and out of it they got two things I got
the Bundeswehr and they got the Bundys
nitrogen-based they both were directly
an outgrowth of that experience and pull
I think the other thing I would say is
that in 1950 the Soviet Union clearly
made a decision to give high priority to
penetrating the gilan organization and
the German government the particularly
the national security system the German
government they did that for the next
three or four years and by 1953-54
they really had the Gilman organization
and most of the new offices in Barn
pretty well taped and so they started a
massive propaganda operation that was
designed to to destroy the Gailen
organization and if they could to slow
down the movement of the German Federal
Republic into the 11th now exactly at
the same time in 1952 the United States
Army made a decision that it was going
to penetrate the German organization and
all of the national security elements in
bang and whereas the Soviets did it with
a Colonel Mack stop they're operating
out of
let her karlshorst the army did it with
a Colonel Thomas operating out of Region
three of 66 the nine seventieth later of
66 CIC I just went on during all of the
next five years from 1950 to 1955 in
1954 of the United States Army launched
a major conspiracy to destroy the game
and organization and get Chancellor
Adenauer to redirect his attention to
creating German intelligence within the
German armed forces and the new
incipient Ministry of Defense which was
in the process of developing this effort
was carried out it was a conspiracy it
were the the the documents that I have
in it just filled with references to
secret meetings secret emissaries
confidential meetings that me sure you
burn this letter after you've read it
why they did this remain thinking of a
mystery to me I do not know at what
point the decision was made to penetrate
the Gailen organization but it was made
in about 1915 it was carried out very
efficiently by CIC the end of the story
is that when the conspiracy did not work
because Speidel and razing who replied
in a very specific way to to the
overture from the g2 in washington that
they would not play this game so the
next year as many of you know from
having read it many versions on it
general Trudeau not content with the
effort he had made he took a direct run
at the Chancellor when he was visiting
Washington in the summer of 1955 and
basically made the same arguments that
have been made in the approach to ship
ride Ellen poisoner and that didn't work
the next thing that happened was Galen
approached me in two weeks three weeks
after that and protested vehemently
about the fact that the that the United
States counterintelligence Corps had
been systematically engaged in
penetration of his organization that was
a difficult one to handle I reported
that no response whatsoever from anybody
and a month later the principal agent of
CIC was arrested by the German police
for suspicion of working for the East
he was taken to prison where he
immediately committed suicide and this
produced a billion said nothing as far
as I can judge that finally brought the
army g2 to cancel its operation of
penetrating the gaming organization and
the government of transfer Adenauer
thank you very much seem to me one of
the most important things we did without
planning it after we had taken over the
Galen organisation we began to have
visitors from the Air Force the army
from CIA and very soon you had a stream
of people arriving there for visitors
Bob Bailey came he was fascinated and
sent some of his people over Sherman
camp got deeply involved now out of this
there
evolved a dialogue that went on between
say a door closing and people like
Maxwell Taylor who came down once and
spent two days with us
general cavil came and what there were
dozens and dozens of other generals came
stayed overnight had done let the German
socially and that briefed by the superb
order of battle experts which is the one
asset the Galen had that was unsurpassed
by anyone now that there grew a decade
of high-level dialogue in a kind of a
think-tank atmosphere between a group of
Germans and a group of Americans who
were very involved in the formative
period of the Western alliance and so
when you got to the point where a de
niro was going to form a government and
where the Germans were going to appear
in NATO in uniform you had a whole group
of officers who had had a 10-year
intimate dialogue with American officers
more three of the services in the CIA
and with a good many political people
and I think that was a tremendous factor
in getting the the the relationship
between the Germans when they entered
the Western alliance getting it off to
the right start